feat: restructured ILP doc (#729)
questdb/questdb.io: docs/reference/api/influxdb-line-protocol.md

---
title: InfluxDB Line Protocol
description: InfluxDB line protocol reference documentation.
---

QuestDB implements the
[InfluxDB line protocol](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v1.8/write_protocols/line_protocol_tutorial/)

> to ingest data. This enables you to use QuestDB as a drop-in replacement for

Reviewer: > a drop-in replacement

That would be correct only if we would support ILP over HTTP. IMO we need to stress that we support the serialization protocol, not the transport one. Many of our users are confused by this and keep asking whether they can use one of the InfluxDB client libraries.

Also, it might be a good idea to list supported client libraries somewhere here or on the `/insert-data` page.

Author: added "difference from InfluxDB" section and removed inaccurate information:https://github.com/questdb/questdb.io/pull/729/commits/fe07a5dc9c8949b401c13213285f182a551d661f

We will need to document our libraries before referencing them. Perhaps this could be a separate effort

Reviewer: > We will need to document our libraries before referencing them. Perhaps this could be a separate effort

Sure, makes sense.

InfluxDB and others implementing the protocol. QuestDB can listen for line
protocol packets both over [TCP](#tcp-receiver) and [UDP](#udp-receiver).

## Usage

### Syntax

```shell
table_name,tagset fieldset timestamp
```

| Element      | Definition                                                                                |
|--------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `table_name` | Name of the table where QuestDB will write data.                                          |

> | `tagset`     | A set of `name=value` pairs separated by commas that will be parsed as symbol columns     |

Reviewer 2: minor: I don't like tagset, fieldset terms, they are Influx specific and confusing for QuestDB first user. I'd better introduce symbol area, column area

Author: I feel `area` is ambiguous. I like the use of word `set`, it implies structure and uniqueness. Could be `symbolset` and `columnset` ?

Author: fixed here https://github.com/questdb/questdb.io/pull/729/commits/322405c92a5509a81d533ad7dc00c221707b5b65

> | `tagset`     | A set of `name=value` pairs separated by commas that will be parsed as symbol columns     |

Author: fixed here: https://github.com/questdb/questdb.io/pull/729/commits/dbc7403e6bf3e0a31f216428e2cd60895cefccf4

`name` in `name=value` pair always corresponds to `column name` in the table

### Behaviour

- When the `table_name` does not correspond to an existing table, QuestDB will
  create the table on the fly using the name provided. Column types will be
  automatically recognized and assigned based on the data.
- The `timestamp` column is automatically created as
  [designated timestamp](/docs/concept/designated-timestamp/) with the
  [partition strategy](/docs/concept/partitions/) set to `NONE`. If you would
  like to define a partition strategy, you should
  [CREATE](/docs/reference/sql/create-table/) the table beforehand.
- When the timestamp is empty, QuestDB will use the server timestamp.

### Generic example

Let's assume the following data:

| timestamp           | city    | temperature | humidity | make      |
|---------------------|---------|-------------|----------|-----------|
| 1465839830100400000 | London  | 23.5        | 0.343    | Omron     |
| 1465839830100600000 | Bristol | 23.2        | 0.443    | Honeywell |
| 1465839830100700000 | London  | 23.6        | 0.358    | Omron     |

> The line protocol syntax for that table is:

Author: fixed here: https://github.com/questdb/questdb.io/pull/729/commits/ab5ab9558cee8d2a403b922bd656ab8badc6fbd7

Both table name and column names are allowed to have spaces ` `. These spaces have to be escaped with `\`. For example
both of these are valid lines.

```shell
trade\ table,ticker=USD price=30,details="Latest price" 1638202821000000000
```

```shell
trade,symbol\ ticker=USD price=30,details="Latest price" 1638202821000000000
```

Table name and columns name must not contain any of the forbidden characters:
`.`, `?`,`,`,`:`,`\`,`/`,`\0`,`)`,`(`,`+`,`*`,`~`,`%` and `-`

### Tagset

Area of the message that contains comma-separated set of `name=value` pairs for symbol columns.
For example in a message like this:

```shell
trade,ticker=BTCUSD,venue=coinbase price=30,price=60 1638202821000000000
```

`tagset` is `ticker=BTCUSD,venue=coinbase`. Please note the mandatory space between `tagset` and `fieldset`. Naming rules
for columns are subject to [duplicate rules](#duplicate-column-names) and [name restrictions](#name-restrictions).

### Tagset values

`tagset` values are always interpreted as [SYMBOL](/docs/concept/symbol/). Parser takes values literally so please beware of
accidentally using high cardinality types such as `9092i` or `1.245667`. This will result in a significant

> performance loss due to bulging mapping tables.

Author: replaced with `large` https://github.com/questdb/questdb.io/pull/729/commits/8fdb96e6fcb533e8ac5628b5eab9868915d5f485

The following `cast` operations are supported when existing table column type is not `double`:

|         | `float` | `double` |
|---------|---------|----------|
| `float` | cast    | `native` |

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="boolean">

These value correspond to QuestDB type `boolean`. In InfluxDB Line Protocol `boolean` values can be represented in
any of the following ways:

| Actual value | Single char lowercase | Single char uppercase | Full lowercase | Full camelcase | Full uppercase |
|--------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|
| `true`       | `t`                   | `T`                   | `true`         | `True`         | `TRUE`         |
| `false`      | `f`                   | `F`                   | `false`        | `False`        | `FALSE`        |

Example:

```shell
sensors,location=south warning=false
```

##### Cast table

The following `cast` operations are supported when existing table column type is not `boolean`:

|           | `boolean` | `byte` | `short` | `int` | `float` | `long` | `double` |
|-----------|-----------|--------|---------|-------|---------|--------|----------|

> | `boolean` | `native`  | cast   | cast    | cast  | cast    | cast   | cast     |

Reviewer 2: Integer will also be cast to timestamp

:::

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="timestamp">

These value correspond to QuestDB type `timestamp`. Timestamp values are epoch `microseconds` suffixed with `t`. 
In this example we're populating _non-designated_ timestamp field `ts1`:

```shell
tracking,obj=VLCC\ STEPHANIE gh="9v1s8hm7wpkssv1h",ts1=10000t 1000000000
```

It is possible to populate _designated_ timestamp using `fieldset`, although this is not recommended. Let's see
how this works in practice. Assuming table:

```sql
create table (loc symbol, ts timestamp) timestamp(ts) partition by day
```

When we send:

```shell title=""
tracking,loc=north ts=2000000000t 1000000000
tracking,loc=south ts=3000000000t
```

The result is `fieldset` value always wins:

| loc   | ts         |
|-------|------------|
| north | 2000000000 |
| south | 3000000000 |

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

### GEOHASH values

`geohash` values can be passed via `fieldset` as `string`. Please refer to [`fieldset` values](#fieldset-values)

### Designated timestamp

Designated timestamp is trailing part of ILP message. It is optional. When present, designated timestamp is Epoch 

> `nanoseconds`. When timestamp is omitted, server will timestamp each message using system's clock. 

Reviewer 2: minor: I think the fact that timestamp field is micro and designated is nano needs a warning sign. Also there is a config parameter which says if designated is nano or micro it's better to add it here

Author: fixed here https://github.com/questdb/questdb.io/pull/729/commits/b6770c86564fb7078b5be5f3034cb95448b05f24

- timestamp appears as a column and also present at the end of the line, the
  value sent as a field will be used

### Commit strategy

ILP transactions are implicit; the protocol is built to stream data at a high
rate of speed and to support batching. There are three ways data is committed
and becomes visible or partially visible. The commit method is chosen based on
whichever occurs first.

#### Row-based commit

Each table has a max uncommitted rows metadata property. The ILP server will
issue a commit when the number of uncommitted rows reaches this value. The table
commit implementation retains data under max uncommitted rows or newer than the
commit lag (whichever is smallest) as uncommitted data. Committed data is
visible to table readers.

This parameter is set using in the following server configuration property:

```shell
# commit when this number of uncommitted records is reached
cairo.max.uncommitted.rows=1000
```

#### Idle table timeout

When there is no data ingested in the table after a set period, the ingested
uncommitted data is fully committed, and table data becomes fully visible. The
timeout value is server-global and can be set via the following server

> configuration property:

Reviewer 2: Would be good to document units here, e.g. is it micros or millis

the commit lag value for each table. The difference is that the commit interval
is a wall clock.

To ease understanding of how time interval interacts with commit lag , let's
look at how real-time data stream will become visible. The wall clock is roughly
aligned with time in the data stream in real-time data. Let's assume that table
has a commit lag value of 60 seconds and a commit interval of 20 seconds. After
the first 60 seconds of ingestion, ILP will attempt to commit 3 times. After
each attempt, there will be no data visible to the application. This is because
all the data will fall within the lag interval.

On the 4th commit, which would occur, 80 seconds after the data stream begins,
the application will see the first 20 seconds of the data, with the remaining 60
seconds uncommitted. Each subsequent commit will reveal more data in 20-second
increments. It should be noted that both commit lag and commit interval should
be carefully chosen with both data visibility and ingestion performance in mind.

This parameter is set using in the following server configuration property:

```shell
# commit uncommitted rows when this timer is reached

> line.tcp.maintenance.job.interval=1000

Reviewer 2: Again, would be good to document units here, e.g. is it micros or millis. If it's the same unit idle commit above never happens. Are these default settings?

Author: fixed

```

### Capacity planning

TCP receiver makes use of 3 logical thread pools:

> - io worker pool - `line.tcp.io.worker.count`, threads responsible for handling incoming TCP connections 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- I/O worker pool - `line.tcp.io.worker.count`, threads responsible for handling incoming TCP connections and parsing received ILP messages
```

ideal ratio is `1:1` - a thread per connection. In less busy environments it is possible for single `io worker`
thread to handle multiple connections simultaneously. We recommend starting with conservative ration, measure and
increase ration up to `1:1`. More threads than connections will be wasting server CPU.

Another consideration is the number of tables updates concurrently. `writer pool` should be tuned to increase
concurrency. `writer` threads can also handle multiple tables concurrently. `1:1` ratio is the maximum required ratio
between `writer` threads and tables.

:::note
Sending updates for multiple tables from single TCP connection might be inefficient. Configure `writer pool` size to 1 for
optimal performance.
:::

When ingesting data out of order (O3) `shared pool` accelerates O3 tasks. It is also responsible for SQL execution.
`shared pool` size should be set to use the remaining available CPU cores.

### Configuration reference

The TCP receiver configuration can be completely customized using
[configuration keys](/docs/reference/configuration/#influxdb-line-protocol).

> You can use this to configure the tread pool, buffer and queue sizes, receiver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use this to configure the thread pools, buffer and queue sizes, receiver
```

> IP address and port, load balancing etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IP address and port, load balancing, etc.
```

## UDP receiver

The UDP receiver can handle both single and multi row write requests. It is

> currently single-threaded, and performs both network IO and write jobs out of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
currently single-threaded, and performs both network I/O and write jobs out of
```
